  -------------------------------------------
  Level   Equivalent Benefits
  -----  ----------- ------------------------
  1       5          Starting Ability & Moves

  2       10         *None*
  
  3       15         Attribute Increase
  
  4       20         Move Upgrade
  
  5       25         Grade+, New Ability
  
  6       30         *None*
  
  7       35         Attribute Increase
  
  8       40         Move Upgrade
  
  9       45         Grade+, New Ability
  
  10      50         *None*
  
  11      55         Attribute Increase
  
  12      60         Move Upgrade
  
  13      65         Grade+, New Ability
  
  14      70         *None*
  
  15      75         Attribute Increase
  
  16      80         Move Upgrade
  
  17      85         Grade+, New Ability
  
  18      90         *None*
  
  19      95         Attribute Increase
  
  20      100        Move Upgrade
 ---------------------------------------------

## Character Creation

To create a character in this roleplaying system, follow these steps:

1. Choose a Pokémon from the Conversion Sheet list. Copy their Health,
    Attack, Special Attack, Defense, Special Defense, Speed, Brawn,
    Talent, and size category. Optionally, roll a D4 for each stat and
    add the result to it.

2. Calculate their starting Health Points by adding their Health score
    to 20.

3. Select the Pokémon's starting Ability, moves from the Conversion
    Sheet, and record them.

4. Assign a Grade of 1 and a Grit of 2 to your character. More details
    about Grade and Grit will be provided in the Playing the Game
    section.

**Optional: Character Skills:**

Your character has 9 points to distribute among 12 available skills.
Remember, you cannot allocate more than 5 points into a single skill.
Detailed explanations of these optional skills will be given in the
Playing the Game section.

### Character Advancement

As you accumulate Experience (XP), you will level up. With each new
level:

1. You can learn new moves if available and may gain additional
    benefits, such as increasing one attribute or acquiring an extra
    ability.

2. Your maximum Hit Points increase by your Health score. This increase
    is not retroactive, so it will not apply if your Health score is
    boosted through stat increases or evolution.

If optional skills are in play:

3. You gain 2 skill points at each level to enhance your skills. Keep
    in mind that evenly distributing skill points results in only one
    skill with 2d6 skill dice. Allocate your points wisely and
    collaborate with your party to fill skill gaps.

Move Upgrades:

4. Move Upgrades are enhancements to specific Moves, making them more
    versatile or specialized. These are optional, and the Dungeon Master
    (DM) may choose not to include them. Each move can have only one
    Move Upgrade.

Additional Abilities:

5. Additional Abilities do not replace existing abilities. This means a
    Pokémon can have up to 6 abilities by level 17 if they acquire
    additional abilities. The DM has the option to exclude these. If
    Technique Upgrades and Additional Abilities are not part of your
    game, treat these levels as Attribute Increase levels.

# Playing the Game

To play Pokémon Wild Life, you will require a variety of dice. The most
common dice used for resolving conflict and checks are two 6-sided dice
(henceforth referred to as 2D6)

## Combat in Pokémon Wild Life

To play Pokémon Wild Life, you will require a variety of dice. The most
common dice used for resolving conflict and checks are two 6-sided dice
(henceforth referred to as 2D6).

In Pokémon Wild Life, combat is structured into Rounds and Turns. A
Round concludes when every participating Pokémon has taken their turn.

Each Pokémon has three actions available during a single turn, but only
one of these actions can be repeated at the expense of the others.

- **Combat Actions:** A Pokémon may perform only one Combat Action per
    turn, unless instructed otherwise. To execute a combat action,
    specify the Physical or Special move you intend to use, roll 2D6,
    and add the relevant Attack stat. A successful attack is determined
    by surpassing or equaling the opponent\'s relevant Defense score
    plus 2D6.

- **Utility Actions:** One Utility Action is allowed per turn, unless
    specified otherwise. To initiate a Utility action, declare the
    Status Move you wish to use. Most Status Moves take effect without
    the need for resolution.

- **Move Actions:** Pokémon can take up to 3 Move Actions per turn.
    However, any additional Move Actions beyond the first one will
    prevent the Pokémon from performing a Combat Action or Utility
    Action. Movement occurs in 5-foot increments (Squares), matching the
    number specified by the Pokémon's Speed stat.

At the end of a round, if a Pokémon is afflicted by a negative status
condition, they may attempt to recover from it. This is done by rolling
2D6 individually for each Status effect. Keep in mind that only one
Status effect can be rolled to recover from at a time. This mechanic
adds an element of strategy and decision-making to the flow of combat.

### Trigger & Saves

Certain moves come with two key components: Trigger effects and Save
effects.

- **Trigger Effects:** When a move lists a Trigger effect, you roll
    1d6. If your roll matches or exceeds the specified target number,
    the effect is activated.

- **Save Effects:** Save effects relate to detrimental status
    conditions that can afflict your Pokémon. At the end of a round, you
    have the opportunity to roll to recover from these negative effects.

  - To attempt recovery, you roll 2d6. If you choose to empower your
        save roll, you roll 2d8 instead.

  - Success in rolling a number equal to or higher than the provided
        target number results in the removal of the negative effect.

  - Importantly, you are limited to rolling for the removal of just
        one negative status per round. This mechanic adds a strategic
        element to managing and recovering from status conditions during
        battles.

### Combat Tactics and Environment

- **Threatened Area and Attacks of Opportunity:** A five-foot radius
    surrounding a Pokémon is that Pokémon's Threatened Area. If a
    Pokémon is within the Threatened Area of another Pokémon and
    attempts to leave, the Foe may use an attack of opportunity.

- **Cover:** Cover is provided by solid objects that stand between you
    and your target. Trees, walls, and boulders are all common examples
    of cover. A creature must be behind such an obstacle so that at
    least half of its body is protected to claim the benefit of cover.
    While a Pokémon has cover, it gains +1 bonus to both defense scores.

- **Attacking an Unseen Target:** When you attack an unseen target,
    you are guessing where it is. If your guess is wrong, even a
    successful attack roll misses. Alternatively, your Pokémon can use a
    utility action to search for the hidden foe. This usually involves a
    Perception check against the foe\'s Guile check, with a +2 bonus if
    your Pokémon has special moves like Foresight or Odor Sleuth. If
    your check is higher, you can attack without penalties.

### Combat Mechanics

- **Critical Hits:** A critical hit occurs when your attack roll
    results in an 11 (before bonuses) for the attack or special attack.
    When this happens, you roll the dice again for that attack and add
    the new result to the damage total. Only the damage dice are
    doubled; any bonus damage like Brawn, Talent, or affinity bonuses
    remains unchanged.

- **Knock-out and Death:** A Pokémon is considered knocked out when
    their Health Points reach zero. A Pokémon dies when their health
    score reaches a negative of their maximum hit point score.

### Other Combat Actions

- **Assist:** A Pokémon can use a combat action to help another
    Pokémon in need. For instance, helping wake a sleeping Pokémon by
    jostling them awake. Many of these tasks do not usually require a
    roll, however, if the assistance is complex or risky, the DM may
    decide if a check is needed. Usually, a Pokémon must be near another
    Pokémon to assist them.

- **Defend:** A Pokémon may choose to defend instead of attack,
    gaining +2 to both Defense scores until the start of its next turn.
    It loses this bonus if it cannot move, its speed is 0, or it is
    unable to use actions or make withdraw strikes.

- **Grab:** Using a free hand or appendage, a Pokémon may attempt to
    grab another Pokémon no more than one size category higher than
    itself. This involves a contested check, and the outcome may lead to
    actions like Moving a Grabbed Pokémon or Pinning a Grabbed Pokémon.

### Environmental Interactions and Special Actions

- **Hide:** To hide, a Pokémon must be in an area that covers or
    conceals its presence, such as behind tall trees or in a dark alley.
    The creature makes a contested check, Guile check contested by the
    foe's Perception check if optional skills are in use.

- **Interact with Environment:** Interacting with environment objects,
    such as cutting rope or pulling a convenient lever, can take as
    little as a utility action. The DM decides how long it takes to
    interact with an environment object in actions. If it is too complex
    an action, the DM may rule that it would take more than a round to
    complete.

- **Knock Down:** A foe that is no larger than one size category above
    your Pokémon can be knocked over. This involves a contested check,
    and if you succeed, the target is knocked prone with associated
    penalties and bonuses to attacks against it.

- **Neutral Attack:** A basic, type less physical attack. It uses the
    Attack stat for accuracy, deals 1d4 points of damage, plus the
    user's Brawn, and cannot have its damage boosted by Technician.

- **Push:** A Pokémon may attempt to push another away if the target
    is no more than one size category larger than it. This involves a
    contested check, and success results in the target being pushed 5
    feet away from the user.

- **Use an Item:** A Pokémon may use an item (e.g., eating a healing
    berry) as a utility action.

### Grit

Grit is a valuable resource you can use to gain an advantage in various
situations. When you use Grit as a Utility Action, you can choose from
the following Combat actions:

- **Recover Hit points:** You can heal yourself by an amount equal to
    your Grade multiplied by your Health Score.

- **Brace for Impact:** This action lets you defend against enemy
    attacks, reducing the damage you take by an amount equal to 5 times
    your Grade, applied after damage calculations.

- **Empower an Attack Roll or Check:** This ability can be used both
    in and out of combat. When you empower your Attack Roll, instead of
    rolling 2D6, you roll 2 eight-sided dice for greater accuracy. When
    empowering a check using optional Skills, you roll an additional die
    appropriate for your skill level.

- **Empower Damage:** When dealing damage, roll an additional d6 for
    each Grade you possess.

Grit naturally recovers after you have had 8 hours of rest, making it a
resource you can strategically use to turn the tide in your favor during
battles and challenges.

### Grade, STAB, Advantage, Resistance, Brawn, and Talent

Grade is related to STAB, Type Advantage, and Type Resistance.

- **STAB:** If your Pokémon shares the same type as the attack they
    are using, they deal extra damage equal to their Grade multiplied by
    2.

- **Advantage:** If the Pokémon you are attacking is weak to the type
    of attack you are using, you deal extra damage equal to your
    Pokémon's grade multiplied by 2, or 4 if it takes 4 times damage.

- **Resistance:** If the Pokémon you are being attacked by is using a
    move whose type you resist, reduce the damage done to you by your
    Grade multiplied by 2, or 4 if you take quarter damage.

- **Brawn and Talent:** These are added to Physical and Special attack
    damage rolls respectively as bonus damage. If Optional Skills are in
    play, Brawn and Talent cannot be increased with stat increases, and
    are instead increased by upgrading a Vigor or Knowledge skill,
    respectively.

### Status Conditions

- **Burn and Poison:** The target suffers damage equal to the affinity
    bonus of the user at the beginning of each Round until they recover
    from it.

- **Binding:** The target takes damage equal to their own affinity
    bonus at the start of each Round and is unable to move until they
    recover, or after 4 turns.

- **Confusion:** The target can only successfully attack on Trigger 3;
    otherwise, they may damage a random ally or themselves.

- **Curse:** The target suffers 8 points of damage at the start of
    every Round.

- **Dazed:** Dazed lasts for one round after it is inflicted. The user
    cannot use Combat actions and has their speed halved.

- **Paralysis:** Paralysis is a severe condition similar to Dazed, but
    more debilitating. It lasts for multiple rounds, rendering the user
    unable to perform Combat actions, and their speed is reduced.

- **Embargo:** The user cannot activate the effects of their held
    item.

- **Encore:** The user may only use their last used move or their
    Neutral Attack.

- **Heal Block:** The user cannot use any Healing Moves or utilize
    Grit for healing. Go For Broke applies this restriction on players,
    with the exception that it cannot be saved from.

- **Infatuation:** The target may only use an attack on Trigger 3. The
    user can still use Utility actions (unless it is an attack with the
    Swift upgrade) or Movement actions.

## Inventory

A character can carry 20 items, plus their Attack skill. An item slot
can store any number of items depending on the weight category.\
Items are divided into 5 weight categories. One hundred tiny items of
the same type can be stored in a single item slot. Ten small items of
the same type can be stored in a single slot. One regular item can be
stored in one slot. One large item requires two item slots to store. One
heavy item requires four item slots to store.

## Optional Skills

Optional skills provide a way to customize your character\'s abilities,
particularly outside of combat scenarios, like social interactions or
physical challenges. Each Pokémon can allocate up to 8 points in any one
of these skills, but they cannot start with more than 5 points in a
single skill.

Skills are categorized into four different proficiency levels:

- **Untrained:** Characters with 0 points in the skill cannot use it
    for skill checks.

- **Novice:** Characters with less than 5 points in the skill roll two
    4-sided dice for checks.

- **Proficient:** Characters with between 5 and 7 points in the skill
    roll two 6-sided dice for checks.

- **Expert:** Characters with 8 points in the skill roll two 8-sided
    dice for checks.

### Interaction Skills

Interaction skills are closely tied to Attack and Speed attributes.

- **Guile:** Guile revolves around stealth and deception, such as
    sneaking past a guard unnoticed or pickpocketing without detection.
    Guile checks are contested by Perception or Intuition checks.

- **Perception:** Use perception actively to detect anything unusual
    with your senses. When trying to spot a hidden foe, it is contested
    by the opponent\'s Guile; otherwise, the DM sets the difficulty.

- **Persuasion:** Persuasion involves convincing others to believe or
    act differently, including Flattery (contested by Willpower),
    Intimidation (contested by Wits), Lying (contested by Intuition), or
    Diplomacy (DM sets the difficulty).

- **Wits:** Wits represent quick reactions in unpredictable
    situations, like evading traps or saving allies from danger. If
    reacting to traps or hazards, the DM sets the difficulty, while
    reacting to intimidation or embarrassment attempts is contested
    against the opponent\'s Wits check.

### Knowledge Skills

Knowledge skills are linked to Special Attack and Special Defense
attributes.

- **Education:** Education encompasses knowledge of various subjects,
    such as languages (e.g., Super Mystery Dungeon\'s foot runes),
    identifying materials or obscure items, or even learning moves from
    TMs not typically available.

- **Intuition:** Use Intuition to distinguish truth from falsehood,
    sense motives, or act on instinct. Identifying forgeries or
    disguises is contested by the opponent\'s Guile, while detecting
    lies or impostors is contested by an opponent\'s Persuasion check.

- **Proficiency:** Proficiency involves executing a trade or talent,
    like crafting items, farming berries, discerning the use of
    artifacts, or detecting sabotage. The DM sets the difficulty,
    especially for tasks like identifying sabotaged tools contested by
    the saboteur\'s Guile check.

- **Survival:** Survival skills help you navigate wilderness hazards
    and find sustenance. Use it to forage for food and materials,
    contend with natural challenges, and gauge if tools are tampered
    with (contested by Guile).

### Vigor Skills

Vigor skills relate to Health and Defense attributes.

- **Athletics:** Athletics allows you to perform physical feats, such
    as pursuing foes, climbing cliffs, leaping gaps, or swimming against
    currents. It is the go-to skill for physical prowess.

- **Fortitude:** Fortitude measures your resilience, whether enduring
    extreme temperatures, surviving without sustenance, or resisting
    illness.

- **Strength:** Strength demonstrates physical power, like lifting
    heavy objects, carrying comrades, breaking barriers, or engaging in
    strength contests against another Pokémon.

- **Willpower:** Willpower is all about maintaining focus and
    discipline in challenging situations, resisting temptation, psychic
    control, distractions, or flattery attempts (contested by Guile).
    The DM sets the difficulty for various scenarios where willpower
    comes into play.

## Additional Abilities

These abilities are drawn from the Pokémon Mystery Dungeon games and
provide unique advantages to your character. Some may have prerequisites
that need to be met before they can be obtained.

### **Rescue Team/Explorers IQ Abilities:**

- **Non-Traitor:** When confused, your character will not accidentally
    attack allies.

- **Self-Curing:** Gain a +1 bonus on rolls to recover from status
    ailments.

- **Sure-Hit Attacker:** Receive a +1-accuracy bonus when making
    attacks.

- **Cheerleader:** Boost the Attack and Special Attack of allies
    within 5 feet by 1.

- **PP Saver:** Moves with limited uses gain an extra use.

- **Type-Advantage Master:** Moves that are strong against opponents
    have a higher critical hit chance, requiring less for a critical
    hit.

- **Wise Healer:** When using Grit to recover HP, heal an amount equal
    to Grade plus 2 times Health score.

- **Wary Fighter:** After missing an attack, you can move an extra 5
    feet and leave a foe\'s Threatened Area without provoking an attack
    of opportunity.

- **Practice Swinger:** Failing to hit a target boosts the user\'s
    Attack and Special Attack by 1 point each until the end of the next
    turn.

- **Sharpshooter:** Reduces the target number for an accuracy roll\'s
    critical hit by 1.

- **Clutch Performer:** If HP drops below 50%, Defense and Special
    Defense increase by 1 point. Below 25%, they increase by an
    additional point, and below 10%, they increase by another point, up
    to a maximum of 3 points each.

- **Critical Dodger:** When a foe\'s strike would be critical, on
    Trigger 5, the attack misses.

- **Extra Striker:** After an attack and on Trigger 6, you can attack
    again, but only one extra attack can be performed this way.

- **Quick Striker (Requires \'Extra Striker\'):** Gain a permanent
    additional attacking action per turn. You may also gain the bonus
    attacking action from Extra Striker.

### **Super Mystery Dungeon Emera Abilities:**

- **Doomstrike (Requires \'Extra Striker\'):** After defeating an enemy,
    gain an additional attacking action during this turn.

- **Doomforce (Requires \'Doomstrike\'):** After defeating an enemy, on
    Trigger 4, all enemy Pokémon within a 10-foot radius take half the
    damage dealt to the fallen foe as typeless damage.

- **Go For Broke:** Once per day, expend 1 grit to boost Attack,
    Defense, Special Attack, Special Defense, and Speed by 1 point, and
    Brawn and Talent by 2 points for the remainder of the battle. While
    under this effect, you cannot use Grit to heal, nor can you be
    healed by items or moves with healing properties.

- **Awakening (Requires \'Go For Broke\'):** Once per day, spend 1
    grit to \'Awaken.\' If capable of Mega Evolution, you immediately
    Mega Evolve without a Mega Evolution Stone. If not, your Attack,
    Defense, Special Attack, Special Defense, Speed increase by 1 point,
    and Brawn and Talent increase by 2 points for the remainder of a
    battle. Can stack with "Go For Broke."

- **Intimidator:** When a foe attacks you, on Trigger 6, the attack automatically misses.

- **Prolong:** When using a move that applies a negative status effect to a foe, the foe has a -1 disadvantage to that roll.

- **Type Bulldozer (Requires \'Type-Advantage Master\'):** Foes that would resist the move\'s type now take normally effective damage. This does not affect type immunity.

### **Original Abilities:**

- **Condition Immunity:** Choose one status condition: Burning, Frozen, Paralyzed, Sleeping, Poisoned, or Confusion. Enemy Pokémon automatically fail to inflict this status effect on you (does not affect moves that cause these effects on the user).

## **Move Abilities:**

- **Aftermath:** When the foe succeeds in ending the effect triggered by this move, it suffers damage equal to your Grade.

- **Chain Reaction:** When this move scores a critical hit, reduce the number needed to trigger the technique's effect by 1.

- **Defiant:** If surrounded, this move's attack roll is empowered without spending Grit.

- **Fulfilling:** When this move is used, either regain hit points equal to its Grade or gain a +1 bonus to checks made to end effects during this Round.

- **Grounding:** Attacks made using a move with Grounding allow Ground-type moves to hit Flying-types.

- **Intense:** This move does an additional +2 damage if your Pokémon is Grade 3 or lower; if Grade 4 or higher, it does +3 damage.

- **Invigorating:** Once per round, if this move deals damage, the user regains hit points equal to its Grade.

- **Mastery:** If a damage roll with this move would result in the minimum amount of damage, reroll, and take the higher result.

- **Precise:** Targets of this move do not gain a bonus from Cover or by using the Defend action.

- **Punishing:** When this technique's damage roll is empowered, it deals an additional +1d6 damage.

- **Sinister:** Targets subject to an effect from this move suffer a -1 penalty to checks made to end it.

- **Staggering:** If the target is vulnerable to this move's damage type, their Brawn and Talent become 0 until their next Turn, and they cannot gain bonuses to their Brawn or Talent during this time.

- **Swift:** Spend one Grit: A Physical or Special move with Swift can be used as a Utility action, and a Status move with Swift can be used as a Move action. This move cannot be used twice in a single turn.

- **Unyielding:** When this move is used, the user cannot be moved from its position except by choice until its next turn.

## Seeds

Due to the nature of how the System works, these seeds function
differently from their Mystery Dungeon counterparts.

- **Joy Seeds:** Permanently increases a Pokémon's Brawn and Talent by 1 point.

- **Golden Seeds:** Permanently increases a Pokémon's Grade by 1, this allows a Pokémon to achieve Grades higher than
